[Overview]: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (born October 13, 1989), also known as AOC, is an American politician and activist who has served since 2019 as the U.S. representative for New York's 14th congressional district. She is a member of the Democratic Party and the Democratic Socialists of America.
Ocasio-Cortez was first elected to Congress in 2018, drawing national attention after defeating Democratic Caucus chair and 10-term incumbent Joe Crowley in the Democratic primary election. Crowley's defeat was wi
[Overview]: == Early life and education ==
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez was born in the Parkchester neighborhood of the Bronx, a borough of New York City, on October 13, 1989. Her father, Sergio Ocasio Román was born in the Bronx to a Puerto Rican family and became an architect; her mother, Blanca Ocasio-Cortez (née Cortés Rivera) was born in Puerto Rico and grew up in Arecibo. Both of her parents identified as Independents, but often voted for New York Democrats. She has a younger brother named Gabriel. The fa
[Overview]: == U.S. House of Representatives (2019–present) ==
Before her political career, Ocasio-Cortez worked as an organizer for the Bernie Sanders 2016 presidential campaign. After the election, she traveled across the U.S. by car, visiting places such as Flint, Michigan, and the Standing Rock Indian Reservation in North Dakota, and speaking to people affected by the Flint water crisis and the Dakota Access Pipeline. In an interview, she recalled her December 2016 visit to Standing Rock as a tipping po
[2018 congressional election]: Ocasio-Cortez began her campaign in April 2017 while waiting tables and tending bar at Flats Fix, a taqueria in New York City's Union Square. "For 80 percent of this campaign, I operated out of a paper grocery bag hidden behind that bar", she told Bon Appétit. She was the first person since 2004 to challenge Joe Crowley, the Democratic Caucus Chair, in the primary. She faced a financial disadvantage, saying, "You can't really beat big money with more money. You have to beat them with a totally d
[2018 congressional election]: ==== Endorsements ====
Ocasio-Cortez was endorsed by progressive and civil-rights organizations such as MoveOn and Democracy for America. Governor Andrew Cuomo endorsed Crowley, as did both of New York's U.S. senators, Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, multiple U.S. representatives, various local elected officials and trade unions, and groups such as the Sierra Club, Planned Parenthood, the Working Families Party, NARAL Pro-Choice America, and Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, amo
[= Primary election =]: Ocasio-Cortez received 57.13% of the vote (15,897) to Crowley's 42.5% (11,761), defeating the 10-term incumbent by almost 15 percentage points on June 26, 2018. The result shocked many political commentators and analysts and immediately garnered nationwide attention. Many news sources, including Time, CNN, The New York Times, and The Guardian mentioned how the win completely defied their predictions and expectations. She was outspent by a margin of 18 to 1 ($1.5 million to $83,000) but won the e
[= Primary election =]: ==== General election ====
Ocasio-Cortez faced Republican nominee Anthony Pappas in the November 6 general election. Pappas, an economics professor, did not actively campaign. The 14th district has a Cook Partisan Voting Index of D+29, making it New York City's sixth-most Democratic district, with registered Democrats outnumbering Republicans almost six to one.
Ocasio-Cortez was endorsed by various politically progressive organizations and figures, including former president Barack Obama and U.S
[= Primary election =]: ==== Media coverage ====
The first media network to give Ocasio-Cortez a platform and extensively cover her campaign and policies was The Young Turks, a left-wing online news program. After her primary win, she quickly garnered nationwide media attention, including numerous articles and TV talk-show appearances. She also drew a great amount of media attention when she and Sanders campaigned for James Thompson in Kansas in July 2018. A rally in Wichita had to be moved from a theater with a capaci
[2020 congressional election]: Michelle Caruso-Cabrera challenged Ocasio-Cortez in the 2020 Democratic primary. After Ocasio-Cortez won the nomination, Caruso-Cabrera reorganized and ran in the general election as the Serve America Movement nominee. Ocasio-Cortez's Republican challengers in the general election included nominee John Cummings, a former police officer, and Antoine Tucker, a write-in candidate.
The American Prospect wrote in October 2020 that Ocasio-Cortez was "spending the 2020 campaign running workshops" for c
[2022 congressional election]: Ocasio-Cortez ran unopposed in the Democratic primary. She defeated Republican Tina Forte and Conservative Party nominee Desi Cuellar in the general election.
[2024 congressional election]: In May, the DSA debated whether to endorse Ocasio-Cortez. Some members argued that she was more committed to the Democratic Party and that her positions on Palestine had become weaker. On June 23, the DSA National Political Committee (NPC) voted to endorse her so long as she fulfilled its list of demands, most concerning Palestine. The New York City chapter, which endorsed her, rejected the deal. On July 10, the NPC withdrew its endorsement of Ocasio-Cortez, citing her participation in a panel t
[Tenure]: Taking office at age 29, Ocasio-Cortez is the youngest woman ever to serve in the United States Congress, and also the youngest member of the 116th Congress.
When the 116th Congress convened on January 3, 2019, Ocasio-Cortez entered with no seniority but with a large social media presence. Axios credited her with "as much social media clout as her fellow freshman Democrats combined". Since June 2024, she has 13.1 million Twitter followers, up from 1.4 million in November 2018. As of January 2025
[Tenure]: ==== Arrival ====
In November 2018, on the first day of congressional orientation, Ocasio-Cortez participated in a climate change protest outside the office of House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi. Also that month, she backed Pelosi's bid to be Speaker of the House on the condition that Pelosi "remains the most progressive candidate for speaker".
[Tenure]: When Ocasio-Cortez made her first speech on the floor of Congress in January 2019, C-SPAN tweeted the video. Within 12 hours, the video of her speech set the record as C-SPAN's most-watched Twitter video of a member of the House of Representatives.
[Tenure]: ==== Hearings ====
In February 2019, speaking at a congressional hearing with a panel of representatives from campaign finance watchdog groups, Ocasio-Cortez questioned the panel about ethics regulations as they apply to both the president and members of Congress. She asserted that no regulations prevent lawmakers "from being bought off by wealthy corporations". With more than 37.5 million views, the clip became the most-watched political video posted on Twitter.
When President Donald Trump's fo
[= Media coverage =]: According to reports in March 2019, Ocasio-Cortez continued to receive media coverage early in her congressional tenure on par with that of 2020 presidential candidates and was considered "one of the faces of the Democratic party" and one of the most talked-about politicians in the United States. Between July 8 and 14, 2019, she drew more social media attention than the Democratic presidential candidates. Tracking company NewsWhip found that interactions with news articles on Ocasio-Cortez numbe
[== Met Gala appearance ==]: Ocasio-Cortez attended the 2021 Met Gala, which had the theme "In America: a Lexicon of Fashion". The Met Gala is an annual fundraiser for the Metropolitan Museum of Art that is overseen by Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour, who selects every invitee and designer pairing. Ocasio-Cortez wore an organza gown emblazoned with the phrase "Tax the Rich". As an elected official in New York City, she was considered a guest of the museum, and as such did not have to buy a ticket, which costs persons oth
[= "The Squad" =]: Ocasio-Cortez is a member of an informal group of progressive members of Congress called "the Squad", initially including Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley, and Rashida Tlaib. On July 14, 2019, Trump attacked the Squad (which had only four members at the time) in a tweet, saying that they should "go back and help fix" the countries they came from rather than criticize the American government. He continued to make similar comments over the next several days, even though three of the women, including Oc
[= Green New Deal =]: Ocasio-Cortez submitted her first piece of legislation, the Green New Deal, to the House on February 7, 2019. She and Senator Ed Markey released a joint non-binding resolution laying out the main elements of a 10-year "economic mobilization" that "would phase out fossil fuel use and overhaul the nation's infrastructure". Their plan called for implementing the "social cost of carbon" that was part of the Obama administration's plans to address climate change. In the process it aimed to create job
[Harassment]: On July 20, 2020, U.S. representatives Ted Yoho and Roger Williams accosted Ocasio-Cortez on the Capitol steps, where Yoho (as overheard by a journalist) called her "disgusting" and told her "You are out of your freaking mind" for recently suggesting that poverty and unemployment were driving a spike in crime in New York City during the COVID-19 pandemic amid her ongoing advocacy for cutting police budgets. Ocasio-Cortez told Yoho that he was being "rude". As she walked away from Yoho into the C
[= January 6 Capitol attack =]: In a nearly 90-minute Instagram Live video made in February 2021, Ocasio-Cortez said that she had previously experienced sexual assault, and recounted her experience of fear during the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, when she was in her office (in the Cannon House Office Building). She said she had hidden in her office bathroom before being startled by a Capitol Police officer who entered her office suite and shouted "Where is she?" before ordering her and her staff to evacuate to a 
[= Second Trump administration =]: Ocasio-Cortez gave her first major convention speech in a primetime slot at the 2024 Democratic National Convention. She expressed support for the Harris–Walz campaign and heavily criticized Trump, calling him a union buster who would "sell this country for a dollar if it meant lining his own pockets and greasing the palms of his Wall Street friends". Ocasio-Cortez addressed the Gaza war, saying Harris was "working tirelessly" for a ceasefire and hostage deal. The speech was generally well recei
[= Second Trump administration =]: Later in March, Ocasio-Cortez joined Sanders on the "Fighting Oligarchy Tour", giving speeches opposing Trump's policies in multiple cities. She said that Trump's tariff policy was "disastrous" and market manipulation, called Trump's immigration crackdown "authoritarian", criticized activist detentions, drew attention to economic inequality, and called for the "courage to brawl for the working class". Ocasio-Cortez became increasingly viewed as a possible successor to Sanders and a candidate for
[= Other issues =]: Ocasio-Cortez reacted to the 2021 Texas power crisis by organizing a fundraiser to provide food, water, and shelter to affected Texans. The fundraiser, which began on February 18, raised $2 million in its first day and $5 million by February 21. The money was given to organizations such as the Houston Food Bank and the North Texas Food Bank. Ocasio-Cortez also traveled to Houston to help volunteers with recovery.
On April 15, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez and three members of Congress called a press confe
[= Other issues =]: On July 1, after the Supreme Court ruled in Trump v. United States that presidents have immunity from criminal prosecution for official actions, Ocasio-Cortez announced she would file articles of impeachment against justices. She said the court was corrupt and that Congress must defend the nation against an "authoritarian capture". On July 10, Ocasio-Cortez officially introduced articles of impeachment against Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito, co-sponsored by seven House Democrats. The 
[= Other issues =]: ==== Committee assignments ====
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Past committee assignments
[= Other issues =]: Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Vice Ranking Member, 2023–25) (2019–2025)
Subcommittee on Health Care and Financial Services
Subcommittee on National Security, the Border, and Foreign Affairs
Committee on Financial Services (2019–2023)
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance and International Financial Institutions (2021–2023)
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Financial Institutions (2019–2021)
Committee on Natural Resources (2023–2025)
Subcommittee on Energy and Mine
[= Other issues =]: ==== Caucus memberships ====
Congressional Equality Caucus
Congressional Progressive Caucus
House Pro-Choice Caucus
Congressional Caucus for the Equal Rights Amendment
Congressional Hispanic Caucus
[Economic policy]: Ocasio-Cortez has rejected state socialism, calling it "undemocratic" and "easily corrupted", but has expressed support for unionization and worker cooperatives. She has argued that free-market economies and democratic socialism are compatible, citing cooperatives as a model.
Ocasio-Cortez supports raising the marginal tax rate on top income earners to fund the implementation of her policy goals. She was among the 46 House Democrats who voted against final passage of the Fiscal Responsibility Ac
[Economic policy]: In September 2019, Ocasio-Cortez introduced an anti-poverty policy proposal (packaged in a bundle called "A Just Society") that would take into account the cost of childcare, health care, and "new necessities" like Internet access when measuring poverty. The proposal would cap annual rent increases and ensure access to social welfare programs for people with convictions and undocumented immigrants. According to the US census, about 40 million Americans live in poverty.
Ocasio-Cortez has proposed
[Environment]: Ocasio-Cortez has called for "more environmental hardliners in Congress", calling climate change "the single biggest national security threat for the United States and the single biggest threat to worldwide industrialized civilization". Referring to a recent United Nations report indicating that the effects of climate change could become irreversible unless carbon emissions are reined in within the next 12 years, she has argued that global warming must be addressed immediately to avert human ext
[= China =]: Ocasio-Cortez criticized the American companies Activision Blizzard and Apple for censoring pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong. She co-signed a letter to Activision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick that read, "As China amplifies its campaign of intimidation, you and your company must decide whether to look beyond the bottom line and promote American values—like freedom of speech and thought—or to give in to Beijing's demands in order to preserve market access."
A bipartisan letter by Ocasio-Cortez a
[= China =]: ==== Middle East ====
Ocasio-Cortez voted to withdraw US military aid for Saudi Arabia's intervention in Yemen, and she was among 56 Democrats to vote in favor of H.Con.Res. 21, which directed President Joe Biden to remove U.S. troops from Syria within 180 days.
Ocasio-Cortez criticized the Trump administration for escalating tensions with Iran, saying it would bring the U.S. into a "military conflict that is completely irresponsible".
Ocasio-Cortez supported the Mahsa Amini protests, saying, "M
[= China =]: ==== Israel-Palestine ====
Ocasio-Cortez supports a two-state solution and opposes the occupation of the West Bank. She was one of 17 representatives to vote against a resolution condemning the Global Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement. She was also one of nine progressive Democrats to vote against a resolution that read "the State of Israel is not a racist or apartheid state" and "the United States will always be a staunch partner and supporter of Israel". In 2021, she said of Israel, 
[Governance]: ==== Judiciary ====
After the contentious confirmation of Supreme Court justice Amy Coney Barrett, Ocasio-Cortez urged Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden to expand the court if he won and their party achieved a Senate majority. In April 2021, she supported a bill to increase the Court's size. She again called for expansion in September 2021 after the Court voted not to grant an emergency stay of the Texas Heartbeat Bill.
In March 2022, Ocasio-Cortez called on Justice Clarence Thomas to re
[Governance]: ==== Pay raises for Congress ====
In 2019, Ocasio-Cortez supported pay raises for Congress. She wrote, "It's not a fun or politically popular position to take. But consistency is important. ALL workers should get cost of living increases. That's why minimum wage should be pegged to inflation, too." Members of Congress make $174,000 annually; the speaker makes $223,500 and House leaders make $193,400. Republican Kevin McCarthy joined her in supporting the pay raise, saying he did not want Congres
[Governance]: ==== Trump impeachments ====
On June 28, 2018, Ocasio-Cortez told CNN she would support the first impeachment of President Trump, citing Trump's alleged violations of the Emoluments Clause and saying that "we have to hold everyone accountable and that no person is above that law."
Ocasio-Cortez supported impeaching Trump a second time for his attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election. On January 3, 2021, she said that the Trump–Raffensperger phone call constituted an impe
[= Andrew Cuomo scandals =]: In April 2020, Ocasio-Cortez was one of 77 representatives to call for public reports of data on COVID-19 cases in nursing homes and long-term care facilities. In March 2021, she and Representative Jamaal Bowman called on New York governor Andrew Cuomo to resign, citing the sexual misconduct allegations against him as well as the New York COVID-19 nursing home scandal about the Cuomo administration's reported undercounting of COVID-19 nursing home deaths.
[= Andrew Cuomo scandals =]: ==== Puerto Rico ====
Ocasio-Cortez has called for "solidarity with Puerto Rico". She has advocated for granting Puerto Ricans further civil rights, regardless of Puerto Rico's legal classification. She advocates for voting rights and disaster relief. Ocasio-Cortez was critical of FEMA's response to Hurricane Maria and the federal government's unwillingness to address Puerto Rico's political status. She believes the federal government should increase investment in Puerto Rico. In August 2020, Oc
[= Andrew Cuomo scandals =]: ==== Withdrawal of Biden ====
After the June 2024 presidential debate, Ocasio-Cortez, who previously supported Biden during the campaign, said that she had spoken with Biden and that he made clear he was staying in the race. She said that she supported him and that her focus was on defeating Republicans in the election. Later, on July 19, she held an Instagram Live in which she said that replacing Biden was risky and legally challenging, but suggested that nominating Vice President Kamala Harris
[= Andrew Cuomo scandals =]: === Healthcare ===
Ocasio-Cortez supports transitioning to a single-payer healthcare system and considers medical care a human right. She says that a single government health insurer should cover every American, reducing overall costs. Her campaign website says, "Almost every other developed nation in the world has universal healthcare. It's time the United States catch up to the rest of the world in ensuring all people have real healthcare coverage that doesn't break the bank." Many 2020 Democr
[= Abortion rights =]: Ocasio-Cortez supports codifying the right to abortion and is a member of the House pro-choice caucus. On July 19, 2022, after the Supreme Court overruled Roe v. Wade in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, she and 17 other members of Congress were arrested in an act of civil disobedience for refusing to clear a street during a protest for reproductive rights outside the Supreme Court Building. Later that day, she appeared at a pro-choice rally in Union Square and recalled being raped i
[= Abortion rights =]: ==== Education ====
Ocasio-Cortez campaigned in favor of establishing tuition-free public colleges and trade schools. She has said she is still paying off student loans herself and wants to cancel all student debt.
[= Abortion rights =]: ==== Immigration ====
Ocasio-Cortez has expressed support for defunding and abolishing the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency on multiple occasions. In February 2018 she called it "a product of the Bush-era Patriot Act suite of legislation" and "an enforcement agency that takes on more of a paramilitary tone every single day". That June, she said she would "stop short of fully disbanding the agency", and would rather "create a pathway to citizenship for more immigrants through
[= Abortion rights =]: ==== LGBTQ rights ====
Ocasio-Cortez is a proponent of LGBTQ rights and equality. She has said she supports the community and thanked its members for their role in her campaign. At the January 2019 New York City Women's March in Manhattan, Ocasio-Cortez gave a detailed speech in support of measures needed to ensure LGBTQ equality in the workplace and elsewhere. She has also spoken in support of transgender rights, specifically saying, "Trans rights are civil rights are human rights." Later, she 
[= Abortion rights =]: ==== Police funding ====
When asked what America would look like if it defunded the police, she responded on Instagram: It looks like a suburb. Affluent white communities already live in a world where they choose to fund youth, health, housing etc more than they fund police. When a teenager or preteen does something harmful in a suburb (I say teen bc this is often where lifelong carceral cycles begin for Black and Brown communities), White communities bend over backwards to find alternatives to 
[2024]: == Awards and honors ==
The MIT Lincoln Laboratory named the asteroid 23238 Ocasio-Cortez after her when she was a senior in high school in recognition of her second-place finish in the 2007 Intel International Science and Engineering Fair. Ocasio-Cortez was named the 2017 National Hispanic Institute Person of the Year by Ernesto Nieto. In 2019, Ocasio-Cortez received the Adelle Foley Award. She was named as one of the 2019 BBC 100 Women. In 2019, she co-wrote and narrated the short film A Messa
[2024]: == Personal life ==
After the death of Ocasio-Cortez's father in 2008, her mother and grandmother moved to Florida due to financial hardship. She still has family in Puerto Rico, where her grandfather was living in a nursing home before he died in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. Ocasio-Cortez has said that "to be Puerto Rican is to be the descendant of ... African Moors [and] slaves, Taino Indians, Spanish colonizers, Jewish refugees, and likely others. We are all of these things and something
[2024]: == See also ==
List of Democratic Socialists of America public officeholders
List of Hispanic and Latino Americans in the United States Congress
List of Latino Democrats
Nuyorican – Puerto Ricans located in or around NYC
Puerto Ricans in New York City
Puerto Ricans in the United States
Women in the United States House of Representatives
[References]: == Further reading ==
Lopez, Lynda (2020). AOC: The Fearless Rise and Powerful Resonance of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. New York: St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-250-25741-3. OCLC 1141032197.
The Editors of New York magazine (2022). Take Up Space: The Unprecedented AOC. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-5011-6697-6. OCLC 1263661994.
[External links]: Official website
Campaign website
Appearances on C-SPAN
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's file at PolitiFact
Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Profile at National Women's History Museum