[概述]: Mark Joseph Carney (born March 16, 1965) is a Canadian politician and economist who has served as the 24th prime minister of Canada since 2025. Carney was also elected as the leader of the Liberal Party and the member of Parliament (MP) for Nepean in 2025. He was previously Governor of the Bank of C
[Early life and education]: Mark Joseph Carney was born on March 16, 1965, at St. Ann's General Hospital in Fort Smith, Northwest Territories. He has three siblings: an older brother and sister, Seán and Brenda, and a younger brother, Brian. When Carney was six, his family moved to Edmonton, Alberta's Laurier Heights where he
[Financial career]: Carney spent thirteen years at Goldman Sachs and worked in their Boston, London, New York City, Tokyo, and Toronto offices. His progressively more senior positions included co-head of sovereign risk, executive director for emerging debt capital markets, and managing director for investment banking.
[Governor of the Bank of Canada (2008–2013)]: In October 2007, Carney was appointed Governor of the Bank of Canada. He immediately left his position at the Department of Finance to become an advisor to the outgoing governor, David Dodge, before formally assuming Dodge's position on February 1, 2008. Carney was selected over Paul Jenkins, the se
[= 2008 financial crisis =]: Carney's actions as Governor of the Bank of Canada are said to have played a major role in helping Canada avoid the worst impacts of the 2008 financial crisis. The epoch-making feature of Carney's tenure as governor remains the decision to cut the overnight rate by 50 basis points in March 2008, one
[= International organization memberships =]: Carney was chairman of the Bank for International Settlements' Committee on the Global Financial System from July 2010 until January 2012. Carney was a member of the Group of Thirty, an international body of leading financiers and academics, and of the Foundation Board of the World Economic Forum. C
[Governor of the Bank of England (2013–2020)]: On November 26, 2012, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne announced the appointment of Carney as Governor of the Bank of England. He succeeded Sir Mervyn King on July 1, 2013. He was the first Commonwealth citizen from outside Britain to be appointed to the role since the Bank of England was
[Post-governorships (2020–2024)]: In 2020, Carney served as one of many informal advisors to Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, advising him on the government's COVID-19 economic response. Carney reportedly advised Trudeau on Canada's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, with Trudeau looking to Carney to help Canada get out of it
[Political beginnings]: According to Carney, in 2012, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper asked Carney—who was then governor of the Bank of Canada—if he would join the Conservative government as minister of finance. Carney declined, stating in a February 2025 interview with the CBC that he felt it "wasn't appropriate" f
[= 2025 leadership election =]: On January 16, 2025, Carney officially announced that he was running in the 2025 Liberal Party of Canada leadership election. Carney also announced that he stepped down from all executive, board and advisory positions that he was part of to focus on his leadership campaign. By February 9, his campai
[Swearing-in]: On March 14, 2025, five days after winning the leadership election, Carney was sworn in as the 24th prime minister of Canada, along with the 30th Canadian Ministry. Upon taking the oath of office, he became the first Canadian prime minister born in any of its territories (as opposed to provinces) an
[2025 federal election]: Carney was widely expected to call a federal parliamentary election for late April or early May 2025, ahead of the required election date in October. On March 22, the Liberal Party announced that Carney would contest the south Ottawa riding of Nepean in the election; ridings in Alberta had been floa
[Domestic policy]: Carney's government passed the first major legislation of his tenure, Bill C-5, the One Canadian Economy Act in June 2025 with Conservative support. The bill removes federal barriers to internal trade and expedites nation-building projects with Cabinet approval; it received opposition from some Indi
[Foreign policy]: In June 2025, Canada hosted the 51st G7 summit in Kananaskis, Alberta. In his capacity as chair, Carney opened the summit and invited other world leaders, including India's Narendra Modi and Ukraine's Volodymyr Zelenskyy. In July 2025, Carney announced that at the next meeting of the UN General Asse
[Views]: Carney has been described as moderate, centrist, and technocratic; he is ideologically characterized as a member of the Blue Grits faction of the Liberal Party of Canada, being described as economically liberal and socially liberal. During the 2023 Global Progress Action Summit, Carney advocated for
[= Wealth inequality =]: In 2011, Carney referred to the Occupy Wall Street protests as "entirely constructive", citing frustrations being felt "particularly in the United States" over inequality and increasing CEO–worker pay gaps. In December 2016, Carney warned of the societal risk of "staggering wealth inequalities" in a
[= Monetary policy =]: On August 23, 2019, Carney delivered a speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's 2019 annual Jackson Hole Economic Symposium entitled "The Growing Challenges for Monetary Policy in the current International Monetary and Financial System". Carney said that the "widespread use of the US doll
[= Moral to market sentiments =]: On December 2, 2020, Carney delivered the first of four Reith Lectures—the BBC's flagship annual series. In "How We Get What We Value – From Moral to Market Sentiments", he said society had come to esteem financial value over human value and moved from market economies to market societies. The serie
[= Fiscal policy =]: After becoming prime minister, Carney reversed the Trudeau government's capital gains tax increase and promised to implement a middle class tax cut and a new approach to federal budgeting that would save tax-payers money if appointed as prime minister.
[= Petroleum industry =]: In June 2025, after becoming prime minister, Carney voiced support for a new oil pipeline to the West Coast and a proposed $16.5 billion carbon capture system for the Athabasca oil sands.  A memorandum of understanding with the Government of Alberta to advance a new pipeline and carbon capture syste
[= Brexit =]: Carney warned many times that Brexit was expected to negatively influence the UK economy. Consequently, Brexit activists accused him of making statements favouring the UK's continued membership of the European Union (EU) before the British EU-membership referendum. He replied that he felt it was his
[= NATO =]: In February 2025, Carney committed that the Canadian government would spend 2% of Canada's GDP on defence (the NATO target) by the end of 2030. In June 2025, Carney committed that the government would reach the 2% target by March 2026 and NATO's new 5% of GDP target by 2035.
[= Iran–Israel conflict =]: Following the Israeli attacks on Iran in June 2025, Carney reaffirmed "Israel's right to defend itself" and called for restraint. Carney supported the 2026 Israeli–United States strikes on Iran while stressing that Canada was not party to the operation.
[= Gaza war =]: In April 2025, Carney disagreed with the accusation that Israel was committing genocide in Gaza, but supported an arms embargo on Israel. In June 2025, he compared the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip and occupation of the West Bank to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In September 2025, he announc
[= India =]: Under Prime Minister Mark Carney, Canada–India relations have entered a period of diplomatic reset following a diplomatic row between the two countries during Justin Trudeau's tenure. Carney, who described it as a "great honor" to host Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the 2025 G7 summit, has a
[= China =]: On June 9, 2025, in his speech on defence spending, Carney warned of new threats to Canada's security and sovereignty, including those coming from an "assertive China." However, relations improved after Carney became Prime Minister, particularly after he held a meeting with Chinese leader Xi Jinping
[= Trade =]: During the 2025 Liberal Party Leadership Race, and in light of aggressive actions taken by the United States under the second Trump administration, Carney said that he supported deepening relationships with fellow Commonwealth member states the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand.
[Environmentalism]: Carney has often advocated for environmental sustainability. He was appointed as a United Nations Special Envoy on Climate Change in 2019. In March 2021, Carney stated that in Canada there is a "huge economic opportunity" in the transition to a sustainable economy with reduced carbon emissions. He s
[Immigration]: In 2025, Carney campaigned to address "unsustainable" immigration to Canada, which had risen to approximately 500,000 a year during Justin Trudeau's premiership. The Liberal Party pledged to reduce the number of permanent residents admitted to Canada to less than 1% of the Canadian population per ye
[Housing]: In a March 2024 op-ed in The Globe and Mail, Carney advocated for a low-carbon housing policy favouring densification over sprawl. He argued that it should be easier for a homebuilder to densify by eliminating unit maxima, abolishing parking minima and allowing taller buildings and more density near
[Personal life]: Carney met British economist Diana Fox, who is also active in various environmental and social justice causes, while studying at the University of Oxford. They were married in July 1994 while he was finishing his doctoral thesis. They have four children; the couple lived in Toronto before moving to
[Published works]: The title of Carney's DPhil thesis is The Dynamic Advantage of Competition. Carney's first book, Value(s): Building a Better World for All, was published by Signal Books in 2021. His second book, The Hinge: Time to Build an Even Better Canada, was indefinitely delayed from its scheduled publishing d
[Honours and distinctions]: Officer of the Order of Canada (OC) on November 20, 2014. Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal in 2012. Freeman of the City of London. Honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D) from the University of Manitoba on April 5, 2013. Honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D) from the University of Albert
[See also]: List of current heads of state and government List of heads of the executive by approval rating
[External links]: Official website Biography from the Bank of England Constituency Website Mark Carney on Bluesky Appearances on C-SPAN Biographical information and career statistics from Eliteprospects.com